Attitude and Sink Rate Control
==============================

The most critical and often the most inexcusable error that can be made in the planning and execution of an emergency landing, even
in ideal terrain, is the loss of initiative over the airplane’s attitude and sink rate at touchdown. When the touchdown is made on flat,
open terrain, an excessive nose-low pitch attitude brings the risk of “sticking” the nose in the ground. Steep bank angles just before
touchdown should also be avoided, as they increase the stalling speed and the likelihood of a wingtip strike.
Since the airplane’s vertical component of velocity is immediately reduced to zero upon ground contact, it should be kept well under
control. A flat touchdown at a high sink rate (well in excess of 500 feet per minute (fpm)) on a hard surface can be injurious without
destroying the cabin structure, especially during gear-up landings in low-wing airplanes. A rigid bottom construction of these
airplanes may preclude adequate cushioning by structural deformation. Similar impact conditions may cause structural collapse of the
overhead structure in high-wing airplanes. On soft terrain, an excessive sink rate may cause digging in of the lower nose structure and
severe forward deceleration.
Terrain Selection
A pilot’s choice of emergency landing sites is governed by:
⦁ The route selected during preflight planning
⦁ The height above the ground when the emergency occurs
⦁ Excess airspeed (excess airspeed can be converted into distance and/or altitude)
The only time the pilot has a very limited choice is during the low and slow portion of the takeoff. However, even under these
conditions, the ability to change the impact heading only a few degrees may ensure a survivable crash.
If beyond gliding distance of a suitable open area, the pilot should judge the available terrain for its energy absorbing capability. If
the emergency starts at a considerable height above the ground, the pilot should be more concerned about first selecting the desired
general area than a specific spot. Terrain appearances from altitude can be very misleading and considerable altitude may be lost
before the best spot can be pinpointed. For this reason, the pilot should not hesitate to discard the original plan for one that is
obviously better. However, as a general rule, the pilot should not change his or her mind more than once; a well-executed crash
landing in poor terrain can be less hazardous than an uncontrolled touchdown on an established field.
Airplane Configuration
Since flaps improve maneuverability at slow speed, and lower the stalling speed, their use during final approach is recommended
when time and circumstances permit. However, the associated increase in drag and decrease in gliding distance call for caution in the
timing and the extent of their application; premature use of flap and dissipation of altitude may jeopardize an otherwise sound plan.
A hard and fast rule concerning the position of a retractable landing gear at touchdown cannot be given. In rugged terrain and trees,
or during impacts at high sink rate, an extended gear would definitely have a protective effect on the cabin area. However, this
advantage has to be weighed against the possible side effects of a collapsing gear, such as a ruptured fuel tank. As always, the
manufacturer’s recommendations as outlined in the AFM/POH should be followed.
When a normal touchdown is assured, and ample stopping distance is available, a gear-up landing on level, but soft terrain or across a
plowed field may result in less airplane damage than a gear-down landing. [Figure 18-3] Deactivation of the airplane’s electrical
system before touchdown reduces the likelihood of a post-crash fire.
However, the battery master switch should not be turned off until the pilot no longer has any need for electrical power to operate vital
airplane systems. Positive airplane control during the final part of the approach has priority over all other considerations, including
airplane configuration and checklist tasks. The pilot should attempt to exploit the power available from an irregularly running engine;
however, it is generally better to switch the engine and fuel off just before touchdown. This not only ensures the pilot’s initiative over
the situation, but a cooled-down engine reduces the fire hazard considerably.
Approach
When the pilot has time to maneuver, the planning of the approach should be governed by the following three factors:
⦁ Wind direction and velocity
⦁ Dimensions and slope of the chosen field
⦁ Obstacles in the final approach path

Figure 18-3. Intentional gear-up landing.
These three factors are seldom compatible. When compromises have to be made, the pilot should aim for a wind/obstacle/terrain
combination that permits a final approach with some margin for error in judgment or technique. A pilot who overestimates the gliding
range may be tempted to stretch the glide across obstacles in the approach path. For this reason, it is sometimes better to plan the
approach over an unobstructed area, regardless of wind direction. Experience shows that a collision with obstacles at the end of a
ground roll or slide is much less hazardous than striking an obstacle at flying speed before the touchdown point is reached.
Terrain Types
Since an emergency landing on suitable terrain resembles a situation in which the pilot should be familiar through training, only the
more unusual situations are discussed.
Confined Areas
The natural preference to set the airplane down on the ground should not lead to the selection of an open spot between trees or
obstacles where the ground cannot be reached without making a steep descent.
Once the intended touchdown point is reached, and the remaining open and unobstructed space is very limited, it may be better to
force the airplane down on the ground than to delay touchdown until it stalls (settles). An airplane decelerates faster after it is on the
ground than while airborne. Thought may also be given to the desirability of ground-looping or retracting the landing gear in certain
conditions.
A river or creek can be an inviting alternative in otherwise rugged terrain. The pilot should ensure that the water or creek bed can be
reached without snagging the wings. The same concept applies to road landings with one additional reason for caution: manmade
obstacles on either side of a road may not be visible until the final portion of the approach.
When planning the approach across a road, it should be remembered that most highways and even rural dirt roads are paralleled by
power or telephone lines. Only a sharp lookout for the supporting structures or poles may provide timely warning.
Trees (Forest)
Although a tree landing is not an attractive prospect, the following general guidelines help to make the experience survivable.

⦁ Use the normal landing configuration (full flaps, gear down).
⦁ Keep the groundspeed low by heading into the wind.
⦁ Make contact at minimum indicated airspeed, but not below stall speed, and “hang” the airplane in the tree
branches in a nose-high landing attitude. Involving the underside of the fuselage and both wings in the initial
tree contact provides a more even and positive cushioning effect, while preventing penetration of the
windshield. [Figure 18-4]
⦁ Avoid direct contact of the fuselage with heavy tree trunks.
⦁ Low, closely spaced trees with wide, dense crowns (branches) close to the ground are much better than tall
trees with thin tops; the latter allow too much free fall height (a free fall from 75 feet results in an impact speed
of about 40 knots, or about 4,000 fpm).
⦁ Ideally, initial tree contact should be symmetrical; that is, both wings should meet equal resistance in the tree
branches. This distribution of the load helps to maintain proper airplane attitude. It may also preclude the loss
of one wing, which invariably leads to a more rapid and less predictable descent to the ground.
⦁ If heavy tree trunk contact is unavoidable once the airplane is on the ground, it is best to involve both wings
simultaneously by directing the airplane between two properly spaced trees. Do not attempt this maneuver,
however, while still airborne.
Figure 18-4. Tree landing.