Water (Ditching) and Snow
=========================

A well-executed water landing normally involves less deceleration violence than a poor tree landing or a touchdown on extremely
rough terrain. Also, an airplane that is ditched at minimum speed and in a normal landing attitude does not immediately sink upon
touchdown. Intact wings and fuel tanks (especially when empty) provide floatation for at least several minutes, even if the cabin may
be just below the water line in a high-wing airplane.
Loss of depth perception may occur when landing on a wide expanse of smooth water with the risk of flying into the water or stalling
in from excessive altitude. To avoid this hazard, the airplane should be “dragged in” when possible. Use no more than intermediate
flaps on low-wing airplanes. The water resistance of fully extended flaps may result in asymmetrical flap failure and slowing of the
airplane. Keep a retractable gear up unless the AFM/POH advises otherwise.
A landing in snow should be executed like a ditching, in the same configuration and with the same regard for loss of depth perception
(white out) in reduced visibility and on wide-open terrain.
Engine Failure After Takeoff (Single-Engine)
A number of variables and pilot actions factor into a successful emergency landing shortly after takeoff. When an engine failure
occurs during the initial climb, the pilot should lower the nose of the airplane and establish the proper glide attitude. What happens
next if the engine does not restart? Does the pilot select a field directly ahead (or slightly to the side of the takeoff path) or should the
pilot turn back toward the point of departure? There's not much time to decide and a lot to consider.
Continuing straight ahead or making a slight turn gives the pilot time to establish a safe landing attitude, and the landing occurs under
control and as slowly as possible (assuming a takeoff made into a headwind). This minimizes the risk of injury and usually represents
the option with the lowest risk—i.e. the safest option. Turning back requires a more complex analysis and consideration of risk. At
some urban airports, there may be numerous hazards in the departure path. In that case, the pilot might turn back, but only if certain
the airplane can reach the field from its current position and the pilot has trained and practiced the turn back maneuver.
Turning back to an airport after a low-altitude engine failure, also known as “the impossible turn,” presents many challenges, and a
pilot who attempts to turn back without due consideration and training will need considerable luck to prevent disaster. If the airplane
strikes the ground during the turn, cartwheeling could occur. If the pilot does not lower the nose sufficiently during the turn, an
accelerated stall and fatal crash may occur. Even after executing a successful turn, a return to the airport often results in a downwind
approach. The increased groundspeed could rush a pilot not properly trained for landing downwind. The increased groundspeed and
associated increase in kinetic energy also raise the likelihood of serious injury if unable to make the field.
If considering a turn back to the runway following an engine failure on takeoff, the pilot should know the expected altitude loss
during the turn for the specific make and model airplane as well as whether the airplane can physically glide back to the field after
executing the turn. Traditionally, the FAA has given the following example. An airplane has taken off and climbed to an altitude of
300 feet above ground level (AGL) when the engine fails. [Figure 18-5] After a typical 4-second reaction time, the pilot elects to
turn back to the runway. Using a standard rate (3° change in direction per second) turn, it takes 1 minute to turn 180°. At a glide
speed of 65 knots, the radius of the turn is 2,100 feet, so at the completion of the turn, the airplane is 4,200 feet to one side of the
runway. The pilot needs to turn another 45° to head the airplane toward the runway. By this time, the total change in direction
is 225° equating to 75 seconds plus the 4-second reaction time. If the airplane in a power-off glide descends at approximately 1,000
fpm, it has descended 1,316, feet placing it 1,016 feet below the runway.
The preceding example illustrates why a turn back, if attempted, requires a turn with a higher bank angle. A standard rate or
shallow turn consumes too much time, requires too much distance, and generates an unacceptable solution.
Training for a turn back includes practicing turns in both directions at a safe altitude in the make and model flown after simulating an
engine failure from a climb. Practice should result in consistent altitude loss and the ability to avoid an accelerated stall when
executing a gliding steep turn. Pilots should be alert for and respond appropriately to any stall warning and reduce wing loading
during the turn as necessary. There will be some observed variation in altitude loss during training. The pilot should anticipate that
during an actual emergency, the expected altitude loss could end up at the high end of the range observed while practicing. Success in
training involves the demonstrated ability to evaluate the effect of climb performance of the airplane, determine the better direction to
turn back (usually into a crosswind), predict the altitude above ground after the turn, know the distance to the landing zone, and know
if the glide performance of the airplane will allow the pilot to make the field. Some airplanes cannot usually make the return
successfully, some can make the return under certain conditions, and some can usually return. The pilot should not attempt a turn back
unless a successful turn back will result.

Figure 18-5. Turning back to the runway after engine failure.
A turn back to the departure runway may require more than a 180° change in direction. There could also be cases where turning back
results in overshooting the runway, and the pilot needs to sense the aiming point within seconds after completing a turn back and make
any necessary adjustments to achieve the best possible outcome. A turn back at low altitudes presents an unacceptable risk for student
pilots, low-time pilots, untrained pilots, pilots without adequate proficiency, and pilots flying airplanes with insufficient glide
performance to return to the field. However, experienced pilots interested in knowing when and how to make an emergency turn back
after takeoff should use the services of an authorized flight instructor who can explain and demonstrate the practicality (or
impracticality) of “the impossible turn” in the specific make and model used during training.
Emergency Descents
An emergency descent is a maneuver for descending as rapidly as possible to a lower altitude or to the ground for an emergency
landing. [Figure 18-6] The need for this maneuver may result from an uncontrollable fire, a sudden loss of cabin pressurization, or
any other situation demanding an immediate and rapid descent. The objective is to descend the airplane as soon and as rapidly as
possible while not exceeding any structural limitations of the airplane. Simulated emergency descents should be made in a turn to
check for other air traffic below and to look around for a possible emergency landing area. A radio call announcing descent
intentions may be appropriate to alert other aircraft in the area. When initiating the descent, a bank of approximately 30 to 45°
should be established to maintain positive load factors (G forces) on the airplane.
Emergency descent training should be performed as recommended by the manufacturer, including the configuration and airspeeds.
Except when prohibited by the manufacturer, the power should be reduced to idle, and the propeller control (if equipped) should
be placed in the low pitch (or high revolutions per minute (rpm)) position. This allows the propeller to act as an aerodynamic brake
to help prevent an excessive airspeed buildup during the descent. The landing gear and flaps should be extended as recommended by
the manufacturer. This provides maximum drag so that the descent can be made as rapidly as possible, without excessive airspeed.
The pilot should not allow the airplane’s airspeed to pass the never-exceed speed (V ), the maximum landing gear extended
NE
speed (V ), or the maximum flap extended speed (V ), as applicable. In the case of an engine fire, a high airspeed descent could
LE FE
blow out the fire. However, the weakening of the airplane structure is a major concern and descent at low airspeed would place less
stress on the airplane. If the descent is conducted in turbulent conditions, the pilot also needs to comply with the design
maneuvering speed (V ) limitations. The descent should be made at the maximum allowable airspeed consistent with the procedure
A
used. This provides increased drag and a high rate of descent. The recovery from an emergency descent should be initiated at a
high enough altitude to ensure a safe recovery back to level flight or a precautionary landing.

Figure 18-6. Emergency descent.
When the descent is established and stabilized during training and practice, the descent should be terminated. In airplanes with piston
engines, prolonged practice of emergency descents should be avoided to prevent excessive cooling of the engine cylinders.
In-Flight Fire
A fire in-flight demands immediate and decisive action. The pilot should be familiar with the procedures outlined to meet this
emergency contained in the AFM/POH for the particular airplane. For the purposes of this handbook, in-flight fires are classified as
in-flight engine fires, electrical fires, and cabin fires.
Engine Fire
An in-flight engine compartment fire is usually caused by a failure that allows a flammable substance, such as fuel, oil, or hydraulic
fluid, to come in contact with a hot surface. This may be caused by a mechanical failure of the engine itself, an engine-driven
accessory, a defective induction or exhaust system, or a broken line. Engine compartment fires may also result from maintenance
errors, such as improperly installed/fastened lines and/or fittings resulting in leaks.
Engine compartment fires can be indicated by smoke and/or flames coming from the engine cowling area. They can also be indicated
by discoloration, bubbling, and/or melting of the engine cowling skin in cases where flames and/or smoke are not visible to the pilot.
By the time a pilot becomes aware of an in-flight engine compartment fire, it usually is well developed. Unless the airplane
manufacturer directs otherwise in the AFM/POH, the first step on discovering a fire should be to shut off the fuel supply to the engine
by placing the mixture control in the idle cut off position and the fuel selector shutoff valve to the OFF position. The ignition switch
should be left ON in order to use up the fuel that remains in the fuel lines and components between the fuel selector/shutoff valve and
the engine. This procedure may starve the engine compartment of fuel and cause the fire to die naturally. If the flames are snuffed out,
no attempt should be made to restart the engine.
If the engine compartment fire is oil-fed, as evidenced by thick black smoke, as opposed to a fuel-fed fire, which produces bright
orange flames, the pilot should consider stopping the propeller rotation by feathering or other means, such as (with constant-speed
propellers) placing the pitch control lever to the minimum rpm position and raising the nose to reduce airspeed until the propeller
stops rotating. This procedure stops an engine-driven oil (or hydraulic) pump from continuing to pump the flammable fluid that is
feeding the fire.
Some light airplane emergency checklists direct the pilot to shut off the electrical master switch. However, the pilot should consider
that unless the fire is electrical in nature, or a crash landing is imminent, deactivating the electrical system prevents the use of panel
radios for transmitting distress messages and also causes air traffic control (ATC) to lose transponder returns.

Pilots of powerless single-engine airplanes are left with no choice but to make a forced landing. Pilots of twin-engine airplanes may
elect to continue the flight to the nearest airport. However, consideration should be given to the possibility that a wing could be
seriously impaired and lead to structural failure. Even a brief but intense fire could cause dangerous structural damage. In some cases,
the fire could continue to burn under the wing (or engine cowling in the case of a single- engine airplane) out of view of the pilot.
Engine compartment fires that appear to have been extinguished have been known to rekindle with changes in airflow pattern and
airspeed.
The pilot should be familiar with the airplane’s emergency descent procedures. The pilot should also bear in mind the following:
⦁ The airplane may be severely structurally damaged to the point that its ability to remain under control could
be lost at any moment.
⦁ The airplane may still be on fire and susceptible to explosion.
⦁ The airplane is expendable and the only thing that matters is the safety of those on board.
Electrical Fires
The initial indication of an electrical fire is usually the distinct odor of burning insulation. Once an electrical fire is detected, the pilot
should attempt to identify the faulty circuit by checking circuit breakers, instruments, avionics, and lights. If the faulty circuit cannot
be readily detected and isolated, and flight conditions permit, the battery master switch and alternator/generator switches should be
turned off to remove the possible source of the fire. However, any materials that have been ignited may continue to burn.
If electrical power is absolutely essential for the flight, an attempt may be made to identify and isolate the faulty circuit by:
1. Turning the electrical master switch OFF.
2. Turning all individual electrical switches OFF.
3. Turning the master switch back ON.
4. Selecting electrical switches that were ON before the fire indication one at a time, permitting a short time
lapse after each switch is turned on to check for signs of odor, smoke, or sparks.
This procedure, however, has the effect of recreating the original problem. The most prudent course of action is to land as soon as
possible.
Cabin Fire
Cabin fires generally result from one of three sources: (1) careless smoking on the part of the pilot and/or passengers; (2) electrical
system malfunctions; or (3) heating system malfunctions. A fire in the cabin presents the pilot with two immediate demands: attacking
the fire and getting the airplane safely on the ground as quickly as possible. A fire or smoke in the cabin should be controlled by
identifying and shutting down the faulty system. In many cases, smoke may be removed from the cabin by opening the cabin air vents.
This should be done only after the fire extinguisher (if available) is used. Then the cabin air control can be opened to purge the cabin
of both smoke and fumes. If smoke increases in intensity when the cabin air vents are opened, they should be immediately closed.
This indicates a possible fire in the heating system, nose compartment baggage area (if so equipped), or that the increase in airflow is
feeding the fire.
On pressurized airplanes, the pressurization air system removes smoke from the cabin; however, if the smoke is intense, it may be
necessary to either depressurize at altitude, if oxygen is available for all occupants, or execute an emergency descent.
In unpressurized single-engine and light twin-engine airplanes, the pilot can attempt to expel the smoke from the cabin by opening the
foul weather windows. These windows should be closed immediately if the fire becomes more intense. If the smoke is severe, the
passengers and crew should use oxygen masks if available, and the pilot should initiate an immediate descent. The pilot should also
be aware that on some airplanes, lowering the landing gear and/or wing flaps can aggravate a cabin smoke problem.
Flight Control Malfunction/Failure
Total Flap Failure
The inability to extend the wing flaps necessitates a no-flap approach and landing. In light airplanes, a no-flap approach and landing
is not particularly difficult or dangerous. However, there are certain factors that should be considered in the execution of this
maneuver. A no-flap landing requires substantially more runway than normal. The increase in required landing distance could be as
much as 50 percent.

When flying in the traffic pattern with the wing flaps retracted, the airplane should be flown in a relatively nose-high attitude to
maintain altitude, as compared to flight with flaps extended. Losing altitude can be more of a problem without the benefit of the drag
normally provided by flaps. A wider, longer traffic pattern may be required in order to avoid the necessity of diving to lose altitude
and consequently building up excessive airspeed.
On final approach, a nose-high attitude can make it difficult to see the runway. This situation, if not anticipated, can result in serious
errors in judgment of height and distance. Approaching the runway in a relatively nose-high attitude can also cause the perception that
the airplane is close to a stall. This may cause the pilot to lower the nose abruptly and risk touching down on the nose-wheel.
With the flaps retracted and the power reduced for landing, the airplane is slightly less stable in the pitch and roll axes. Without flaps,
the airplane tends to float considerably during roundout. The pilot should avoid the temptation to force the airplane onto the runway
at an excessively high speed. Neither should the pilot flare excessively because without flaps, this might cause the tail to strike the
runway.
Asymmetric (Split) Flap
An asymmetric “split” flap situation is one in which one flap deploys or retracts while the other remains in position. The problem is
indicated by a pronounced roll toward the wing with the least flap deflection when wing flaps are extended/retracted.
The roll encountered in a split flap situation is countered with opposite aileron. The yaw caused by the additional drag created by the
extended flap requires substantial opposite rudder resulting in a cross-control condition. Almost full aileron may be required to
maintain a wings-level attitude, especially at the reduced airspeed necessary for approach and landing. The pilot should not attempt to
land with a crosswind from the side of the deployed flap because the additional roll control required to counteract the crosswind may
not be available.
The approach to landing with a split flap condition should be flown at a higher than normal airspeed. The pilot should not risk an
asymmetric stall and subsequent loss of control by flaring excessively. Rather, the airplane should be flown onto the runway so that
the touchdown occurs at an airspeed consistent with a safe margin above flaps-up stall speed.
Loss of Elevator Control
In many airplanes, the elevator is controlled by two cables: a “down” cable and an “up” cable. Normally, a break or disconnect in
only one of these cables does not result in a total loss of elevator control. In most airplanes, a failed cable results in a partial loss of
pitch control. In the failure of the “up” elevator cable (the “down” elevator being intact and functional), the control yoke moves aft
easily but produces no response. Forward yoke movement, however, beyond the neutral position produces a nose-down attitude.
Conversely, a failure of the “down” elevator cable, forward movement of the control yoke produces no effect. The pilot, however, has
partial control of pitch attitude with aft movement.
When experiencing a loss of up-elevator control, the pilot can retain pitch control by:
⦁ Applying considerable nose-up trim
⦁ Pushing the control yoke forward to attain and maintain desired attitude
⦁ Increasing forward pressure to lower the nose and relaxing forward pressure to raise the nose
⦁ Releasing forward pressure to flare for landing
When experiencing a loss of down-elevator control, the pilot can retain pitch control by:
⦁ Applying considerable nose-down trim
⦁ Pulling the control yoke aft to attain and maintain attitude
⦁ Releasing back pressure to lower the nose and increasing back pressure to raise the nose
⦁ Increasing back pressure to flare for landing
Trim mechanisms can be useful in the event of an in-flight primary control failure. For example, if the linkage between the cabin and
the elevator fails in flight, leaving the elevator free to weathervane in the wind, the trim tab can be used to raise or lower the elevator
within limits. The trim tabs are not as effective as normal linkage control in conditions such as low airspeed, but they do have some
positive effect—usually enough to bring about a safe landing.
If an elevator becomes jammed, resulting in a total loss of elevator control movement, various combinations of power and flap
extension offer a limited amount of pitch control. A successful landing under these conditions, however, can be problematic.