Door Opening In-Flight
======================

In most instances, the occurrence of an inadvertent door opening is not of great concern to the safety of a flight, but rather, the pilot’s
reaction at the moment the incident happens. A door opening in flight may be accompanied by a sudden loud noise, sustained noise
level, and possible vibration or buffeting. If a pilot allows himself or herself to become distracted to the point where attention is
focused on the open door rather than maintaining control of the airplane, loss of control may result even though disruption of airflow
by the door is minimal.
In the event of an inadvertent door opening in flight or on takeoff, the pilot should adhere to the following:
⦁ Concentrate on flying the airplane. Particularly in light single and twin-engine airplanes; a cabin door that
opens in flight seldom if ever compromises the airplane’s ability to fly. There may be some handling
effects, such as roll and/or yaw, but in most instances these can be easily overcome.
⦁ If the door opens after lift-off, do not rush to land. Climb to normal traffic pattern altitude, fly a normal
traffic pattern, and make a normal landing.
⦁ Do not release the seat belt and shoulder harness in an attempt to reach the door. Leave the door alone.
Land as soon as practicable, and close the door once safely on the ground.
⦁ Remember that most doors do not stay wide open. They usually bang open and then settle partly closed. A
slip towards the door may cause it to open wider; a slip away from the door may push it closed.
⦁ Do not panic. Try to ignore the unfamiliar noise and vibration. Also, do not rush. Attempting to get the
airplane on the ground as quickly as possible may result in steep turns at low altitude.
⦁ Complete all items on the landing checklist.
⦁ Remember that accidents are almost never caused by an open door. Rather, an open door accident is caused
by the pilot’s distraction or failure to maintain control of the airplane.
Inadvertent VFR Flight Into IMC
It is beyond the scope of this handbook to incorporate a course of training in basic attitude instrument flying. This information is
contained in the Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15). Certain pilot certificates and/or associated ratings require training in
instrument flying and a demonstration of specific instrument flying tasks on the practical test.
Pilots and flight instructors should refer to the Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15) for guidance in the performance of
these tasks and to the appropriate airman certification standards (ACS) for information on the evaluation of tasks performed for the
particular certificate level and/or rating. The pilot should remember, however, that unless these tasks are practiced on a continuing
and regular basis, skill erosion begins almost immediately. In a very short time, the pilot’s assumed level of confidence is much
higher than the performance he or she is actually able to demonstrate should the need arise.
Accident statistics show that the pilot who has not been trained in attitude instrument flying, or one whose instrument skills have
eroded, lose control of the airplane in about 10 minutes once forced to rely solely on instrument references. The purpose of this
section is to provide guidance on practical emergency measures to maintain airplane control for a limited period of time in the event a
VFR pilot encounters instrument meteorological conditions (IMC). The main goal is not precision instrument flying; rather, it is to
help the VFR pilot keep the airplane under adequate control until suitable visual references are regained.
The first steps necessary for surviving an encounter with IMC by a VFR pilot are as follows:
⦁ Recognition and acceptance of the seriousness of the situation and the need for immediate remedial action
⦁ Maintaining control of the airplane
⦁ Obtaining the appropriate assistance to get the airplane safely on the ground
Recognition
Anytime a VFR pilot is unable to maintain airplane attitude control by reference to the natural horizon, the condition is considered to
be IMC regardless of the circumstances or the prevailing weather conditions. Whether the cause is inadventent or intentional, the
VFR pilot is, in effect, in IMC if unable to navigate or establish geographical position by visual reference to landmarks on the
surface. These situations should be accepted by the pilot involved as a genuine emergency requiring appropriate action.

Pilots should understand that unless they are trained, qualified, and current in the control of an airplane solely by reference to flight
instruments, they will be unable to do so for any length of time. Many hours of VFR flying using the attitude indicator as a reference
for airplane control may lull pilots into a false sense of security based on an overestimation of their personal ability to control the
airplane solely by instrument references. In VFR conditions, even though the pilot believes the instrument references will be easy to
use, the pilot also receives an overview of the natural horizon and may subconsciously rely on it more than the attitude indicator. If
the natural horizon were to suddenly disappear, the untrained instrument pilot would be subject to vertigo, spatial disorientation, and
inevitable control loss.
Maintaining Airplane Control
Once the pilot recognizes and accepts the situation, he or she should understand that the only way to control the airplane safely is by
using and trusting the flight instruments. Attempts to control the airplane partially by reference to flight instruments while searching
outside of the airplane for visual confirmation of the information provided by those instruments results in inadequate airplane control.
This may be followed by spatial disorientation and complete control loss.
The most important point to be stressed is that the pilot should not panic. The task at hand may seem overwhelming, and the situation
may be compounded by extreme apprehension. However, the pilot should make a conscious effort to relax. The pilot needs to
understand the most important concern—in fact the only concern at this point—is to keep the wings level. An uncontrolled turn or
bank usually leads to difficulty in achieving the objectives of any desired flight condition, but good bank control has the effect of
making pitch control much easier.
The pilot should remember that a person cannot feel control pressures with a tight grip on the controls. Relaxing and learning to
“control with the eyes and the brain,” instead of only the muscles usually takes considerable conscious effort.
The pilot needs to believe what the flight instruments show about the airplane’s attitude regardless of what the natural senses tell. The
vestibular sense (motion sensing by the inner ear) can and will confuse the pilot. Because of inertia, the sensory areas of the inner ear
cannot detect slight changes in airplane attitude, nor can they accurately sense attitude changes that occur at a uniform rate over a
period of time. On the other hand, false sensations are often generated, leading the pilot to believe the attitude of the airplane has
changed when, in fact, it has not. These false sensations result in the pilot experiencing spatial disorientation.
Attitude Control
An airplane is, by design, an inherently stable platform and, except in turbulent air, maintains approximately straight-and-level flight
if properly trimmed and left alone. It is designed to maintain a state of equilibrium in pitch, roll, and yaw. The pilot should be aware,
however, that a change about one axis affects the stability of the others. The typical light airplane exhibits a good deal of stability in
the yaw axis, slightly less in the pitch axis, and even lesser still in the roll axis. The key to emergency airplane attitude control,
therefore, is to:
⦁ Trim the airplane with the elevator trim so that it maintains hands-off level flight at cruise airspeed.
⦁ Resist the tendency to over-control the airplane. Fly the attitude indicator with fingertip control. No attitude
changes should be made unless the flight instruments indicate a definite need for a change.
⦁ Make all attitude changes smooth and small, yet with positive pressure. Remember that a small change as
indicated on the horizon bar corresponds to a proportionately much larger change in actual airplane
attitude.
⦁ Make use of any available aid in attitude control, such as autopilot or wing leveler.
The primary instrument for attitude control is the attitude indicator. [Figure 18-12] Once the airplane is trimmed so that it maintains
hands-off level flight at cruise airspeed, that airspeed need not vary until the airplane is slowed for landing. All turns, climbs, and
descents can and should be made at this airspeed. Straight flight is maintained by keeping the wings level using “fingertip pressure”
on the control wheel. Any pitch attitude change should be made by using no more than one bar width up or down.

Figure 18-12. Attitude indicator.
Turns
Turns are perhaps the most potentially dangerous maneuver for the untrained instrument pilot for two reasons:
⦁ The normal tendency of the pilot to over-control, leading to steep banks and the possibility of a “graveyard
spiral.”
⦁ The inability of the pilot to cope with the instability resulting from the turn.
When a turn is to be made, the pilot should anticipate and cope with the relative instability of the roll axis. The smallest practical
bank angle should be used—in any case no more than 10° bank angle. [Figure 18-13] A shallow bank takes very little vertical lift
from the wings resulting in little if any deviation in altitude. It may be helpful to turn a few degrees and then return to level flight if a
large change in heading is necessary. Repeat the process until the desired heading is reached. This process may relieve the
progressive overbanking that often results from prolonged turns.
Figure 18-13. Level turn.