Climbs
======

If a climb is necessary, the pilot should raise the miniature airplane on the attitude indicator no more than one bar width and apply
power. [Figure 18-14] The pilot should not attempt to attain a specific climb speed but accept whatever speed results. The objective
is to deviate as little as possible from level flight attitude in order to disturb the airplane’s equilibrium as little as possible. If the
airplane is properly trimmed, it assumes a nose-up attitude on its own commensurate with the amount of power applied. Torque and
P-factor cause the airplane to have a tendency to bank and turn to the left. This should be anticipated and compensated for. If the
initial power application results in an inadequate rate of climb, power should be increased in increments of 100 rpm or 1 inch of
manifold pressure until the desired rate of climb is attained. Maximum available power is seldom necessary. The more power that is
used, the more the airplane wants to bank and turn to the left. Resuming level flight is accomplished by first decreasing pitch attitude
to level on the attitude indicator using slow but deliberate pressure, allowing airspeed to increase to near cruise value and then
decreasing power.
Figure 18-14. Level climb.
Descents
Descents are very much the opposite of the climb procedure if the airplane is properly trimmed for hands-off straight-and-level flight.
In this configuration, the airplane requires a certain amount of thrust to maintain altitude. The pitch attitude is controlling the
airspeed. The engine power, therefore, (translated into thrust by the propeller) is maintaining the selected altitude. Following a power
reduction, however slight, there is an almost imperceptible decrease in airspeed. However, even a slight change in speed results in
less down load on the tail, whereupon the designed nose heaviness of the airplane causes it to pitch down just enough to maintain the
airspeed for which it was trimmed. The airplane then descends at a rate directly proportionate to the amount of thrust that has been
removed. Power reductions should be made in increments of 100 rpm or 1 inch of manifold pressure and the resulting rate of descent
should never exceed 500 fpm. The wings should be held level on the attitude indicator, and the pitch attitude should not exceed one
bar width below level. [Figure 18-15]

Figure 18-15. Level descent.
Combined Maneuvers
Combined maneuvers, such as climbing or descending turns, should be avoided if at all possible by an untrained instrument pilot.
Combining maneuvers only compounds the problems encountered in individual maneuvers and increases the risk of control loss. The
objective is to keep the airplane under control by maintaining as much of the airplane’s natural equilibrium as possible. Deviating as
little as possible from straight-and-level flight attitude makes this much easier.
When being assisted by ATC, the pilot may detect a sense of urgency while being directed to change heading and/or altitude. This
sense of urgency reflects a normal concern for safety on the part of the controller. Nevertheless, the pilot should not let this prompting
lead to rushing into a maneuver that could result in loss of control. It's reasonable to ask the controller to slow down, if this becomes
an issue.