Psychological Hazards
=====================

There are several factors that may interfere with a pilot’s ability to act promptly and properly when faced with an emergency. Some of
these factors are listed below.
⦁ Reluctance to accept the emergency situation—a pilot who allows the mind to become paralyzed at the
thought that the airplane will be on the ground in a very short time, regardless of the pilot’s actions or
hopes, is severely handicapped in the handling of the emergency. An unconscious desire to delay the
dreaded moment may lead to such errors as: failure to lower the nose to maintain flying speed, delay in the
selection of the most suitable landing area within reach, and indecision in general. Desperate attempts to
correct whatever went wrong at the expense of airplane control fall into the same category.
⦁ Undue concern about getting hurt—fear is a vital part of the self-preservation mechanism. However, when
fear leads to panic, we invite that which we want most to avoid. The survival records favor pilots who
maintain their composure and know how to apply the general concepts and procedures that have been
developed through the years. The success of an emergency landing is as much a matter of the mind as of
skills.

⦁ Desire to save the airplane—the pilot who has been conditioned during training to expect to find a relatively
safe landing area, whenever the flight instructor closed the throttle for a simulated forced landing, may
ignore all basic rules of airmanship to avoid a touchdown in terrain where airplane damage is unavoidable.
Typical consequences are: making a 180° turn back to the runway when available altitude is insufficient;
stretching the glide without regard for minimum control speed in order to reach a more appealing field; and
accepting an approach and touchdown situation that leaves no margin for error. The desire to save the
airplane, regardless of the risks involved, may be influenced by two other factors: the pilot’s financial stake
in the airplane and the certainty that an undamaged airplane implies no bodily harm. There are times,
however, when a pilot should be more interested in sacrificing the airplane so that the occupants can safely
walk away from it.
Basic Safety Concepts
General
A pilot who is faced with an emergency landing in terrain that makes extensive airplane damage inevitable should keep in mind that
the avoidance of crash injuries is largely a matter of: (1) keeping the vital structure (cabin area) relatively intact by using dispensable
structure (i.e., wings, landing gear, fuselage bottom) to absorb the violence of the stopping process before it affects the occupants and
(2) avoiding forceful bodily contact with interior structure. Avoiding forcible contact with interior structure is a matter of seat and
body security. Unless the occupant decelerates at the same rate as the surrounding structure, no benefit is realized from its relative
intactness. The occupant is brought to a stop violently in the form of a secondary collision.
The advantage of sacrificing dispensable structure is demonstrated daily on the highways. A head-on car impact against a tree at 20
miles per hour (mph) is less hazardous for a properly restrained driver than a similar impact against the driver’s door. Accident
experience shows that the extent of crushable structure between the occupants and the principal point of impact on the airplane has a
direct bearing on the severity of the transmitted crash forces and, therefore, on survivability.
Dispensable airplane structure is not the only available energy absorbing medium in an emergency situation. Vegetation, trees, and
even manmade structures may be used for this purpose. Cultivated fields with dense crops, such as mature corn and grain, are almost
as effective in bringing an airplane to a stop with repairable damage as an emergency arresting device on a runway. [Figure 18-1]
Brush and small trees provide considerable cushioning and braking effect without destroying the airplane. When dealing with natural
and manmade obstacles with greater strength than the dispensable airplane structure, the pilot should plan the touchdown in such a
manner that only nonessential structure is “used up” in the principal slowing-down process.
Figure 18-1. Using vegetation to absorb energy.

The overall severity of a deceleration process is governed by speed (groundspeed) and stopping distance. The most critical of these is
speed; doubling the groundspeed means quadrupling the total destructive energy and vice versa. Even a small change in groundspeed
at touchdown—be it as a result of wind or pilot technique—affects the outcome of a controlled crash. It is important that the actual
touchdown during an emergency landing be made at the lowest possible controllable airspeed, using all available aerodynamic
devices.
Most pilots instinctively—and correctly—look for the largest available flat and open field for an emergency landing. Actually, very
little stopping distance is required if the speed can be dissipated uniformly; that is, if the deceleration forces can be spread evenly
over the available distance. This concept is designed into the arresting gear of aircraft carriers that provides a nearly constant stopping
force from the moment of hookup.
The typical light airplane is designed to provide protection in crash landings that expose the occupants to nine times the acceleration
of gravity (9G) in a forward direction. Assuming a uniform 9G deceleration, at 50 mph the required stopping distance is about 9.4
feet. While at 100 mph, the stopping distance is about 37.6 feet—about four times as great. [Figure 18-2] Although these figures are
based on an ideal deceleration process, it is interesting to note what can be accomplished in an effectively used short stopping
distance. Understanding the need for a firm but uniform deceleration process in very poor terrain enables the pilot to select
touchdown conditions that spread the breakup of dispensable structure over a short distance, thereby reducing the peak deceleration
of the cabin area.
Figure 18-2. Stopping distance vs. groundspeed.