Emergency Descents
==================

An emergency descent is a maneuver for descending as rapidly as possible to a lower altitude or to the ground for an emergency
landing. [Figure 18-6] The need for this maneuver may result from an uncontrollable fire, a sudden loss of cabin pressurization, or
any other situation demanding an immediate and rapid descent. The objective is to descend the airplane as soon and as rapidly as
possible while not exceeding any structural limitations of the airplane. Simulated emergency descents should be made in a turn to
check for other air traffic below and to look around for a possible emergency landing area. A radio call announcing descent
intentions may be appropriate to alert other aircraft in the area. When initiating the descent, a bank of approximately 30 to 45°
should be established to maintain positive load factors (G forces) on the airplane.
Emergency descent training should be performed as recommended by the manufacturer, including the configuration and airspeeds.
Except when prohibited by the manufacturer, the power should be reduced to idle, and the propeller control (if equipped) should
be placed in the low pitch (or high revolutions per minute (rpm)) position. This allows the propeller to act as an aerodynamic brake
to help prevent an excessive airspeed buildup during the descent. The landing gear and flaps should be extended as recommended by
the manufacturer. This provides maximum drag so that the descent can be made as rapidly as possible, without excessive airspeed.
The pilot should not allow the airplane’s airspeed to pass the never-exceed speed (V ), the maximum landing gear extended
NE
speed (V ), or the maximum flap extended speed (V ), as applicable. In the case of an engine fire, a high airspeed descent could
LE FE
blow out the fire. However, the weakening of the airplane structure is a major concern and descent at low airspeed would place less
stress on the airplane. If the descent is conducted in turbulent conditions, the pilot also needs to comply with the design
maneuvering speed (V ) limitations. The descent should be made at the maximum allowable airspeed consistent with the procedure
A
used. This provides increased drag and a high rate of descent. The recovery from an emergency descent should be initiated at a
high enough altitude to ensure a safe recovery back to level flight or a precautionary landing.

Figure 18-6. Emergency descent.
When the descent is established and stabilized during training and practice, the descent should be terminated. In airplanes with piston
engines, prolonged practice of emergency descents should be avoided to prevent excessive cooling of the engine cylinders.