Engine Fire
===========

An in-flight engine compartment fire is usually caused by a failure that allows a flammable substance, such as fuel, oil, or hydraulic
fluid, to come in contact with a hot surface. This may be caused by a mechanical failure of the engine itself, an engine-driven
accessory, a defective induction or exhaust system, or a broken line. Engine compartment fires may also result from maintenance
errors, such as improperly installed/fastened lines and/or fittings resulting in leaks.
Engine compartment fires can be indicated by smoke and/or flames coming from the engine cowling area. They can also be indicated
by discoloration, bubbling, and/or melting of the engine cowling skin in cases where flames and/or smoke are not visible to the pilot.
By the time a pilot becomes aware of an in-flight engine compartment fire, it usually is well developed. Unless the airplane
manufacturer directs otherwise in the AFM/POH, the first step on discovering a fire should be to shut off the fuel supply to the engine
by placing the mixture control in the idle cut off position and the fuel selector shutoff valve to the OFF position. The ignition switch
should be left ON in order to use up the fuel that remains in the fuel lines and components between the fuel selector/shutoff valve and
the engine. This procedure may starve the engine compartment of fuel and cause the fire to die naturally. If the flames are snuffed out,
no attempt should be made to restart the engine.
If the engine compartment fire is oil-fed, as evidenced by thick black smoke, as opposed to a fuel-fed fire, which produces bright
orange flames, the pilot should consider stopping the propeller rotation by feathering or other means, such as (with constant-speed
propellers) placing the pitch control lever to the minimum rpm position and raising the nose to reduce airspeed until the propeller
stops rotating. This procedure stops an engine-driven oil (or hydraulic) pump from continuing to pump the flammable fluid that is
feeding the fire.
Some light airplane emergency checklists direct the pilot to shut off the electrical master switch. However, the pilot should consider
that unless the fire is electrical in nature, or a crash landing is imminent, deactivating the electrical system prevents the use of panel
radios for transmitting distress messages and also causes air traffic control (ATC) to lose transponder returns.

Pilots of powerless single-engine airplanes are left with no choice but to make a forced landing. Pilots of twin-engine airplanes may
elect to continue the flight to the nearest airport. However, consideration should be given to the possibility that a wing could be
seriously impaired and lead to structural failure. Even a brief but intense fire could cause dangerous structural damage. In some cases,
the fire could continue to burn under the wing (or engine cowling in the case of a single- engine airplane) out of view of the pilot.
Engine compartment fires that appear to have been extinguished have been known to rekindle with changes in airflow pattern and
airspeed.
The pilot should be familiar with the airplane’s emergency descent procedures. The pilot should also bear in mind the following:
⦁ The airplane may be severely structurally damaged to the point that its ability to remain under control could
be lost at any moment.
⦁ The airplane may still be on fire and susceptible to explosion.
⦁ The airplane is expendable and the only thing that matters is the safety of those on board.