Cabin Fire
==========

Cabin fires generally result from one of three sources: (1) careless smoking on the part of the pilot and/or passengers; (2) electrical
system malfunctions; or (3) heating system malfunctions. A fire in the cabin presents the pilot with two immediate demands: attacking
the fire and getting the airplane safely on the ground as quickly as possible. A fire or smoke in the cabin should be controlled by
identifying and shutting down the faulty system. In many cases, smoke may be removed from the cabin by opening the cabin air vents.
This should be done only after the fire extinguisher (if available) is used. Then the cabin air control can be opened to purge the cabin
of both smoke and fumes. If smoke increases in intensity when the cabin air vents are opened, they should be immediately closed.
This indicates a possible fire in the heating system, nose compartment baggage area (if so equipped), or that the increase in airflow is
feeding the fire.
On pressurized airplanes, the pressurization air system removes smoke from the cabin; however, if the smoke is intense, it may be
necessary to either depressurize at altitude, if oxygen is available for all occupants, or execute an emergency descent.
In unpressurized single-engine and light twin-engine airplanes, the pilot can attempt to expel the smoke from the cabin by opening the
foul weather windows. These windows should be closed immediately if the fire becomes more intense. If the smoke is severe, the
passengers and crew should use oxygen masks if available, and the pilot should initiate an immediate descent. The pilot should also
be aware that on some airplanes, lowering the landing gear and/or wing flaps can aggravate a cabin smoke problem.
Flight Control Malfunction/Failure
Total Flap Failure
The inability to extend the wing flaps necessitates a no-flap approach and landing. In light airplanes, a no-flap approach and landing
is not particularly difficult or dangerous. However, there are certain factors that should be considered in the execution of this
maneuver. A no-flap landing requires substantially more runway than normal. The increase in required landing distance could be as
much as 50 percent.

When flying in the traffic pattern with the wing flaps retracted, the airplane should be flown in a relatively nose-high attitude to
maintain altitude, as compared to flight with flaps extended. Losing altitude can be more of a problem without the benefit of the drag
normally provided by flaps. A wider, longer traffic pattern may be required in order to avoid the necessity of diving to lose altitude
and consequently building up excessive airspeed.
On final approach, a nose-high attitude can make it difficult to see the runway. This situation, if not anticipated, can result in serious
errors in judgment of height and distance. Approaching the runway in a relatively nose-high attitude can also cause the perception that
the airplane is close to a stall. This may cause the pilot to lower the nose abruptly and risk touching down on the nose-wheel.
With the flaps retracted and the power reduced for landing, the airplane is slightly less stable in the pitch and roll axes. Without flaps,
the airplane tends to float considerably during roundout. The pilot should avoid the temptation to force the airplane onto the runway
at an excessively high speed. Neither should the pilot flare excessively because without flaps, this might cause the tail to strike the
runway.