Landing Gear Malfunction
========================

Once the pilot has confirmed that the landing gear has in fact malfunctioned and that one or more gear legs refuses to respond to the
conventional or alternate methods of gear extension contained in the AFM/POH, a gear-up landing is considered inevitable. The pilot
should select an airport with crash and rescue facilities, if possible. The pilot should not hesitate to request that emergency equipment
is standing by.
When selecting a landing surface, the pilot should consider that a smooth, hard-surface runway usually causes less damage than a
rough, unimproved grass strip. A hard surface does, however, create sparks that can ignite fuel. If the airport is so equipped, the pilot
can request that the runway surface be foamed. The pilot should consider burning off excess fuel. This reduces landing speed and fire
potential.
If the landing gear malfunction is limited to one main landing gear leg, the pilot should consume as much fuel from that side of the
airplane as practicable, thereby reducing the weight of the wing on that side. The reduced weight makes it possible to delay the
unsupported wing from contacting the surface during the landing roll until the last possible moment. Reduced impact speeds result in
less damage.
If only one landing gear leg fails to extend, the pilot has the option of landing on the available gear legs or landing with all the gear
legs retracted. Landing on only one main gear usually causes the airplane to veer strongly in the direction of the faulty gear leg after
touchdown. If the landing runway is narrow and/or ditches and obstacles line the runway edge, maximum directional control after
touchdown is a necessity. In this situation, a landing with all three gear retracted may be the safest course of action.
If the pilot elects to land with one main gear retracted (and the other main gear and nose gear down and locked), the landing should
be made in a nose-high attitude with the wings level. As airspeed decays, the pilot should apply whatever aileron control is necessary
to keep the unsupported wing airborne as long as possible. [Figure 18-7] Once the wing contacts the surface, the pilot can anticipate
a strong yaw in that direction. The pilot should be prepared to use full opposite rudder and aggressive braking to maintain some
degree of directional control.
Figure 18-7. Landing with one main gear retracted.
When landing with a retracted nose-wheel (and the main gear extended and locked), the pilot should hold the nose off the ground
until almost full up-elevator has been applied. [Figure 18-8] The pilot should then release back pressure in such a manner that the
nose settles slowly to the surface. Applying and holding full up-elevator results in the nose abruptly dropping to the surface as
airspeed decays, possibly resulting in burrowing and/or additional damage. Brake pressure should not be applied during the landing
roll unless absolutely necessary to avoid a collision with obstacles.

Figure 18-8. Landing with nose-wheel retracted.
If the landing occurs with only the nose gear extended, the initial contact should be made on the aft fuselage structure with a nosehigh attitude. This procedure helps prevent porpoising and/or wheelbarrowing. The pilot should then allow the nose-wheel to
gradually touchdown, using nose-wheel steering as necessary for directional control.
System Malfunctions
Electrical System
The loss of electrical power can deprive the pilot of numerous critical systems, and therefore should not be taken lightly even in
day/visual flight rules (VFR) conditions. Most in-flight failures of the electrical system are located in the generator or alternator. Once
the generator or alternator system goes off line, the electrical source in a typical light airplane is a battery. If a warning light or
ammeter indicates the probability of an alternator or generator failure in an airplane with only one generating system, however, the
pilot may have very little time available from the battery.
The rating of the airplane battery provides a clue as to how long it may last. With batteries, the higher the amperage load, the faster
any available stored energy gets consumed. Thus, a 25-amp hour battery could produce 5 amps per hour for 5 hours, but if the load
were increased to 10 amps, it might last only 2 hours. A 40-amp load might discharge the battery fully in about 10 or 15 minutes.
Much depends on the battery condition at the time of the system failure. If the battery has been in service for a few years, its power
may be reduced substantially because of internal resistance. Or if the system failure was not detected immediately, much of the stored
energy may have already been used. It is essential, therefore, that the pilot immediately shed non-essential loads when the generating
source fails. [Figure 18-9] The pilot should then plan to land at the nearest suitable airport.
What constitutes an “emergency” load following a generating system failure cannot be predetermined because the actual
circumstances are always somewhat different—for example, whether the flight is VFR or instrument flight rules (IFR), conducted in
day or at night, in clouds or in the clear. Distance to nearest suitable airport can also be a factor.
The pilot should remember that the electrically-powered (or electrically-selected) landing gear and flaps do not function properly on
the power left in a partially-depleted battery. Landing gear and flap motors use power at rates much greater than most other types of
electrical equipment. The result of selecting these motors on a partially-depleted battery may well result in an immediate total loss of
electrical power.

Figure 18-9. Electrical load for light single.
If the pilot expects an imminent and complete in-flight loss of electrical power, the following steps should be taken:
⦁ Shed all but the most necessary electrically-driven equipment.
⦁ Understand that any loss of electrical power is critical in a small airplane—notify ATC of the situation
immediately. Request radar vectors for a landing at the nearest suitable airport.
⦁ If landing gear or flaps are electrically controlled or operated, plan the arrival well ahead of time. Expect to
make a no-flap landing and anticipate a manual landing gear extension.