Pitot-Static System
===================

The source of the pressure for operating the airspeed indicator, the vertical speed indicator (VSI), and the altimeter is the pitot-static
system. The major components of the pitot-static system are the impact pressure chamber and lines and the static pressure chamber
and lines, each of which are subject to total or partial blockage by ice, dirt, and/or other foreign matter. Blockage of the pitot-static
system adversely affects instrument operation. [Figure 18-10]
Partial static system blockage is insidious in that it may go unrecognized until a critical phase of flight. During takeoff, climb, and
level-off at cruise altitude the altimeter, airspeed indicator, and VSI may operate normally. No indication of malfunction may be
present until the airplane begins a descent.

Figure 18-10. Effects of blocked pitot-static sources.
If the static reference system is severely restricted, but not entirely blocked, as the airplane descends, the static reference pressure at
the instruments begins to lag behind the actual outside air pressure. While descending, the altimeter may indicate that the airplane is
higher than actual because the obstruction slows the airflow from the static port to the altimeter. The VSI confirms the altimeter’s
information regarding rate of change because the reference pressure is not changing at the same rate as the outside air pressure. The
airspeed indicator, unable to tell whether it is experiencing more airspeed pitot pressure or less static reference pressure, indicates a
higher airspeed than actual. To the pilot, the instruments indicate that the airplane is too high, too fast, and descending at a rate much
lower than desired.
If the pilot levels off and then begins a climb, the altitude indication may still lag. The VSI indicates that the airplane is not climbing
as fast as actual. The indicated airspeed, however, may begin to decrease at an alarming rate. The least amount of pitch-up attitude
may cause the airspeed needle to indicate dangerously near stall speed.
Managing a static system malfunction requires that the pilot know and understand the airplane’s pitot-static system. If a system
malfunction is suspected, the pilot should confirm it by opening the alternate static source. This should be done while the airplane is
climbing or descending. If the instrument needles move significantly when this is done, a static pressure problem exists and the
alternate source should be used during the remainder of the flight.
Failure of the pitot-static system may also have serious consequences for Electronic Flight Instrument Systems (EFIS). To satisfy the
requirements of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 23, section 23.2615(b)(2), information essential for
continued safe flight and landing will be available to the flightcrew in a timely manner after any single failure or probable
combination of failures. However, many of the light aircraft equipped with glass displays typically share the same pitot-static inputs
for the backup instrumentation. Since both systems are receiving the same input signals, both could fail if affected by obstructed or
blocked pitot tubes and static ports and create a difficult situation for a pilot flying in IMC. Some manufacturers combine both the air
data computer (ADC) and the attitude and heading reference system (AHRS) functions so that a blockage of the input system may
also affect the attitude display.
With conventional instrumentation, the design and operation are similar regardless of aircraft or manufacturer. By
comparing information between the six conventional instruments, pilots are able to diagnose common failure modes.
Instrument failure indications of conventional instruments and electronic flight displays may be entirely different, and
electronic systems failure indications are not standardized. With the wide diversity in system design of glass displays, the
primary display and the backup display may respond differently to any interruption of data input, and both displays may
function differently than conventional instruments under the same conditions.

It is imperative for pilots to obtain equipment-specific information in reference to both the aircraft and the avionics that fully prepare
them to interpret and properly respond to equipment malfunctions of electronic flight instrument displays. Rapidly changing
equipment, complex systems, and the difficulty or inability to simulate failure modes and functions can impose training limitations.
Pilots still should be able to respond to equipment malfunctions in a timely manner without impairing other critical flight tasks should
the need arise.