Inadvertent VFR Flight Into IMC
===============================

It is beyond the scope of this handbook to incorporate a course of training in basic attitude instrument flying. This information is
contained in the Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15). Certain pilot certificates and/or associated ratings require training in
instrument flying and a demonstration of specific instrument flying tasks on the practical test.
Pilots and flight instructors should refer to the Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15) for guidance in the performance of
these tasks and to the appropriate airman certification standards (ACS) for information on the evaluation of tasks performed for the
particular certificate level and/or rating. The pilot should remember, however, that unless these tasks are practiced on a continuing
and regular basis, skill erosion begins almost immediately. In a very short time, the pilot’s assumed level of confidence is much
higher than the performance he or she is actually able to demonstrate should the need arise.
Accident statistics show that the pilot who has not been trained in attitude instrument flying, or one whose instrument skills have
eroded, lose control of the airplane in about 10 minutes once forced to rely solely on instrument references. The purpose of this
section is to provide guidance on practical emergency measures to maintain airplane control for a limited period of time in the event a
VFR pilot encounters instrument meteorological conditions (IMC). The main goal is not precision instrument flying; rather, it is to
help the VFR pilot keep the airplane under adequate control until suitable visual references are regained.
The first steps necessary for surviving an encounter with IMC by a VFR pilot are as follows:
⦁ Recognition and acceptance of the seriousness of the situation and the need for immediate remedial action
⦁ Maintaining control of the airplane
⦁ Obtaining the appropriate assistance to get the airplane safely on the ground
Recognition
Anytime a VFR pilot is unable to maintain airplane attitude control by reference to the natural horizon, the condition is considered to
be IMC regardless of the circumstances or the prevailing weather conditions. Whether the cause is inadventent or intentional, the
VFR pilot is, in effect, in IMC if unable to navigate or establish geographical position by visual reference to landmarks on the
surface. These situations should be accepted by the pilot involved as a genuine emergency requiring appropriate action.

Pilots should understand that unless they are trained, qualified, and current in the control of an airplane solely by reference to flight
instruments, they will be unable to do so for any length of time. Many hours of VFR flying using the attitude indicator as a reference
for airplane control may lull pilots into a false sense of security based on an overestimation of their personal ability to control the
airplane solely by instrument references. In VFR conditions, even though the pilot believes the instrument references will be easy to
use, the pilot also receives an overview of the natural horizon and may subconsciously rely on it more than the attitude indicator. If
the natural horizon were to suddenly disappear, the untrained instrument pilot would be subject to vertigo, spatial disorientation, and
inevitable control loss.