Autoland
========

If the EAL senses erratic flying, it stabilizes the aircraft, and checks for pilot responsiveness. Without further input, the EAL initiates
an emergency descent. Without pilot responsiveness after an emergency descent, EAL initiates the process for an automated landing.
The system also allows for manual activation by a pilot or a passenger.
Once activated, the EAL system transmits automated radio broadcasts on the aircraft’s last selected frequency and on Guard (121.5
MHz) to alert controllers or pilots in the area of the EAL aircraft’s imminent arrival to the selected runway. The system repeatedly
transmits the call sign and intention to divert to a particular airport and runway using a recognizable non-human synthesized voice.
Additionally, EAL sets the transponder to squawk 7700 to indicate an emergency. After the initial broadcast, the system pauses for 25
seconds to allow air traffic control (ATC) to communicate with potential conflicting traffic. Once the EAL aircraft is within 12 miles
of the selected runway and at or below 12,000 feet MSL, it broadcasts on the tower frequency or Common Traffic Advisory
Frequency (CTAF), and continues to broadcast its position via ADS-B. It announces its call sign,“pilot incapacitation,” its position
relative to the destination airport, gives the airport and airport identifier, and the time to landing on a specific runway at that airport.
The system makes a similar “one-minute out” broadcast prior to landing.
The EAL system selects a suitable landing airfield based on several factors. These factors include weather, wind, runway length, and
towered/non-towered airport status. EAL only considers airports with an area navigation (RNAV) or Global Positioning System
(GPS) approach, selects towered airports over non-towered airports where possible, and uses runway requirements that depend on the
aircraft type. EAL systems also utilize obstacle and a terrain databases. If the system loses GPS coverage, the airplane continues
straight flight without attempting to land until GPS coverage resumes.

Currently EAL system capabilities do not include detecting and avoiding other aircraft; receiving or reacting to ATC instructions or
Notices to Airmen (NOTAMs); avoiding military operations areas (MOAs), special use airspace (SUA), Restricted Areas, or
Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs); or turning on aircraft lights.